mankind has always found an innate
horror in things that are different
an evolutionary reflex to protect itself
from the things that may be dangerous to
them or their loved ones
eons ago human beings found homo erectus
to be terrifying
because it was different leading to
their assumed extinction
this is not entirely unlike the reaction
toward homosexuality from the
heterosexual majority
something different something strange
something queer
something that goes against what they
believe to be the natural order of
things
and that in and of itself is the initial
seed of horror
being afraid of things you do not
understand things that do not belong
creatures and events that go against
your own survival needs
a son or daughter that bears no children
could possibly lead to the end of your
lineage
and what else do you exist for other
than to procreate
in the days and years before the rise of
mesopotamia
egypt greece rome what was there to
civilization
or creating the next generation of
people
and homosexuals both men and women
could theoretically put a stop to that
and so it can be assumed that from the
very beginning of time homosexuality was
looked at as
not just a societal other but a danger
to mankind itself though like many
things existing before the written word
this proved to be untrue
this idea along with other fanciful
creations of pre-history
has survived into the modern age the
notion of homosexuality as a danger to
mankind as a whole has been disproven
time and time again but sometimes
ancient teachings are hard to be
forgotten
and so the queer entered into the horror
canon
centuries before hollywood even existed
before horror movies graced the silver
screen before the works of bram stoker
and mary shelley sent chills down reader
spines
before the people of salem burned those
accused of being witches alive
before even the murder of saint
sebastian
the fear of the unknown according to the
american psychological association
is one of the most prominent causes for
anxiety among people in both the first
and third world
it accounts for the hatred toward
anything existing outside the norm
in bathroom laws across the united
states
in the banning of immigrants in the
murder of non-white people
in the remaining animosity toward
homosexuals
and anyone looked at as queer but this
was not always the case
for millennia homosexuality and gender
fluidity were not things to fear but
things to embrace if not celebrate
egypt had gay and lesbian and by all
accounts transgender pharaohs and queens
mesopotamia had gay kings most of the
ancient greek philosophers were gay or
bisexual
rome had gay emperors and senators even
early christianity was
more or less accepting of gay men but
that didn't last
along with the dark ages came a great
tumult that led to the fear of anything
and anyone non-christian
women became witches gay men became
warlocks
and the very idea of homosexuality was
attributed to demonic possession
if not from satan himself than from the
pagan deities that lingered and swept
down from the north
and that is where our story of gay
horror picks up
hundreds of years later
with a coven of witches
the craft released in 1996 holds an odd
appeal within the lgbt community
there are no queer characters but
the coding the film follows the story of
four teenage girls who each grow up
feeling different in one way or another
special and above the fray of their
peers
or rejected by them entirely as so many
queer teens have experienced
either being praised for their artistic
prowess and theater
art or dance are roundly rejected by the
populace at large
for being different by happenstance the
four girls end up in the same school
and find each other essentially by
cruising the hallways
sideways looks and quiet nods to each
other lead to
hookup which for them is going
shopping for candles after school
the most memorable character by all
accounts is nancy
and she's already out as a witch openly
practicing the craft
she wears goth lipstick and black laced
up stevie nicks boots
she has a sexual history and a noose
hanging in her locker
bonnie is a girl with self-image issues
due to scars that cover her arms and
back like so many queer kids she just
wants to be left alone
yet she fears that in the end that's
exactly the thing that will happen
that she'll grow up lonely never finding
love
rochelle the only black character faces
racist comments from the other students
angering her but only insofar as pouting
about what they did to her cashmere
sweater
this isn't a movie about racism after
all it's about wikiphobia
and finally sarah the main character
isn't sure about her identity at all in
the beginning
she starts out craft curious
this is her journey she's confronted
with peer pressure and her own
internalized wichiphobia
back at school the next day she doesn't
want to be rejected by the popular kids
so
she downplays her relationship with
nancy bonnie and rochelle
chris your typical teenage movie
football jock
persists in making bullying comments
about the three spiritual deviants
who he calls the [ __ ] of eastwick
because he's just so clever after the
four witches have confirmed each other's
witchy tendencies
the four take a bus to the witchy part
of town where a young person can go and
be themselves
a safe space with no anti-witch judgment
in the movie the neighborhood seems to
be an empty grassy field but to many a
queer youth watching it in 1996
it was the castro district of san
francisco chelsea in new york or church
street in toronto
whether a place safe for witches or gays
the bus driver knows exactly
where he's going to take them warning
them
gay icon confirmed what follows are
multiple scenes resembling radical queer
fairy gatherings
where they call the corners and chant
hail to the guardians
they also perform a ceremony that might
someday constitute polyamorous marriage
later the girls hold a body electric
workshop where they play
light as a feather stiff as a board
empowered by their chosen family the
girls inadvertently start causing their
revenge fantasies to come true
these revenge scenarios are framed in
classic locations of gay teen drama
the white racist begins losing her
blonde hair while showering in the gym
locker room
the football jock falls in love with one
of the witches and is then driven crazy
when the love is unrequited sadly the
film's narrative wraps up as witchcraft
backfires on the girls
thereby illustrating the dangers of
non-conformity
the girls survive only by vowing to
never practice the craft again
they all end up back in the closet
except one
who ends up in a straitjacket being
released the same year the defensive
marriage act was put in place
and only two years after the don't ask
don't tell policy was passed
the craft became an instant hit an
occult sensation
that would be played at gay halloween
parties for literally decades to come
as mentioned before the connection
between witches and homosexuality has
gone back centuries if not millennia
lesbians were accused of witchcraft more
than any other group of women
and gay men were regularly accused of
being warlocks
or simply possessed by satan
it's always funny really that the
christian right wing believes that god's
main adversary is so interested in us
we should take it as a compliment really
in modern wicca homosexuality is highly
embraced
although heteronormativity was a strict
rule among wiccans in the early to mid
20th century
newer wiccan traditions often avoid or
disregard the historical aversion to
lgbt people
these new traditions often cite the
charge of the goddess which states
all acts of love and pleasure are my
rituals
many queer christians have found that
the teachings of the church led them
down the path of wicca and witchcraft
witchcraft on the other hand offered a
spiritual space where queer people could
step into their personal power and
explore otherness without shame
guilt or fear though most
self-identified witches begin dabbling
in magic at a young age
it's not until after puberty that it
becomes a real draw for them
furthermore the idea of a coven creates
a space for community
a spiritual place where one can be
themselves without the ever-present
evangelical eye though many would
suspect that modern witches grew up in
ultra-liberal hippie-esque environments
today over 80 percent of self-identified
witches grew up in right-wing christian
homes
an environment that seems rife for
creating things that are very
unchristian
based on the best-selling novel by queer
ally stephen king
carrie tells the story of kerry white
teenage girl trying desperately to make
it through her high school years
she's bullied for being a bit different
for being shy
for not fitting in and like many young
christians
doesn't feel at home in the stifling
environment of an evangelical household
possibly the most obvious queer coding
in the story is when carrie's ultra
religious mother
actually locks her in a closet declaring
that she'll be sent to hell and punished
for being
who she is if she continues down this
sinful path carrie has a crush you see
on the high school heartthrob tommy and
like many a gay boy and girl in their
high school years he is completely
unattainable until he's not
until he's suddenly interested in carrie
a predicament both thrilling
and terrifying how many queer high
schoolers have been in that position
having a crush on a boy or girl thinking
there's no way that they could possibly
be into you
that they're most likely straight
approaching them romantically may even
end in violence
especially in the 1970s when the book
and movie came out
this can easily be placed on most high
schoolers who feel like they don't fit
in
but it's particularly salient for queer
kids
i myself had a crush in junior high
we'll call him
dan he knew i was gay and seemed
relatively accepting but the
ever-existing caveat
but i'm not gay so you know don't try
anything always hovered over the
friendship
i knew there was no chance and then one
night my friends and i
were having a movie night six of us were
piled into my room watching bram
stoker's dracula itself
full of queer imagery and while most
everyone had spread out around the room
dan and i ended up in my bed a single
bed with barely enough room for me let
alone another six foot soccer player
he didn't seem to mind though nothing
happened between us of course
but knowing that my straight best friend
was okay
practically cuddling with me made me
pretty happy
no such luck for carrie white though or
most queer kids
after much bullying even by characters
not coded strictly as villains
carrie is invited to the prom the
epitome of high school heteronormativity
not just invited but invited by the most
all-american crush she could possibly
have the epitome of the high school
crush archetype
not of his own volition mind you but by
the cajoling of his girlfriend sue who
seems to be the only decent person in
the entire school
but carrie doesn't know that she gets to
believe for just a little while
that a boy like that could really like
her and to make it all that much better
the rabid [ __ ] who's been making her
high school life a living hell
won't even be there thanks to the help
of a
coded lesbian gym teacher eventually
voted prom queen
carries on top of the world and then the
rug is pulled out from under her
a bucket of pig's blood is pulled from
the rafters
coating her head to toe and suddenly the
realization hits
the fear that every queer kid holds down
deep inside
that they'll be accepted lauded even
just for it all to be one big practical
joke
pranks like these are not uncommon
there's a reason every outsider in high
school fears them
pig's blood usually isn't involved but
raising up an oddball student
to the very highest of heights just to
push them off at the edge
it does happen this is when most would
run off the stage in horror and shame
hide from the people who did this but
not carrie
not unlike the videos we see of high
school kids fighting back against their
bullies
carrie strikes back in a vicious and
bloody attack
that leaves the prom coded in even more
blood than she
fires rage around the gymnasium as she
makes her way through it
a revenge fantasy for every teenager who
has ever been
othered made fun of bullied attacked
held down carries a horror to mainstream
audiences
terrified of the other but a hero to
queer kids
and everyone who doesn't fit in a
literal horror superhero
director of the 2013 remake lesbian
director kimberly pierce said
i think another queer part of the
narrative is that carrie gets
superpowers
and those superpowers are like a queer
person understanding that they have a
talent
or a queer person finally coming to
terms with their gender identity
or sexual preference and saying even if
this is not the mainstream it's okay
because that's literally what carrie
says she says to her mom
there are other people out there like me
i am normal i am okay
even if you don't think so i've talked
to
a lot of gay people and they love the
revenge tale
love that carrie gets even they love
that she goes after the people that did
this to her
it's an echo of what a queer person
could write as a kind of
corrective narrative given carrie's
status as a cultural icon her
simultaneous status as horror film
victim and monster
alongside the narrative concerning her
burgeoning sexuality and attraction to
boys
she may well be situated as a powerful
figure of identification for gay male
viewers
kerry's narrative can also be read as a
variation on the coming out tale both
sexually and socially
and revolves around the awkwardness of
revealing one's own sexuality to one's
parents
especially one's mother and the guilt or
shame involved in doing so
the film also has both cult and camp
lure
mainly from its use of excess a staple
of director brian de palma
in the excessive style and form of his
direction in terms of lighting
color coding and the melodramatic use of
music and score
of course in the end from my point of
view anyway
kerry is all about shame much like the
shame of gay teenagers and certain types
of families
certain kinds of home towns not fitting
in
being ostracized even when you try to
fit in
and this shame is personified by carrie
white
gay audiences form a connection with
carrie
unlike with most horror heroines she is
the internalized anxiety within us
the yearning to be something more to fit
in
and yet be ourselves to not be bullied
or at least to fight back against the
bully but we're not all carrie white
sometimes that self-hatred internalizes
something dark and morbid
roiling within our bodies a demon
ravaging our very soul
demons are not just beings of pain and
torment and clive barker's hellraiser
they're moral abominations creatures so
lost in hedonism
they've long since forgotten the
difference between pain and pleasure
demons that could be mistaken or even
accepted for
angels from a certain point of view
though many would question the queerness
of hellraiser it lurches
well beyond breaking heteronormativity
it skins it alive written and directed
by clive barker and based on his novella
the hell-bound heart
hellraiser tells the story of frank
cotton a man who has broken
every imaginable sexual taboo who has
crossed
every human limit and has still not met
his fill of sexual sadism
bdsm has become all too vanilla for him
and so he searches out an infernal
puzzle box
that when solved summons
interdimensional beings known as the
cenobites
creatures that dwell in a realm of
extreme kernel indulgence
where people are willingly subjected to
severe forms of sadomasochism
that include but are surely not limited
to
being torn apart by hooks and chains
clearly this amalgamation of pleasure
and pain is extremely hyperbolized for
the sake of horror
but it doesn't feel too far off from the
way queer people in the bdsm community
are often perceived by those who don't
understand
that subculture that's the key variable
that makes hellraiser so special
parker is entirely aware of
heteronormative insecurities such as
versions of polyamory involving frank
and his mistress julia
barker takes these insecurities and
combines them with imagery derived from
the underground leather scene of the
time
mixed with the art of herronius bach in
order to create a film
about the broad spectrum of sensuality
and sexuality
he shocked audiences with its subversive
but wildly inclusive material
even more important is the fact that
clive barker created this story as a gay
man
which allows queer representation to
transcend the page and screen making
hellraiser resonate even more profoundly
having always been interested in
monsters it could be safe to assume that
barker was fascinated by outsiders and
outcasts like his creations
because he could relate to them and he
wasn't alone
the queer bdsm culture of the time
welcomed hellraiser with open arms
indulging in its allegorical betrayal of
kink
polyamory and queerness this subgroup of
the lgbt community grew quickly in the
1980s
as a way to experience sexual pleasure
that didn't involve penile penetration
avoiding hiv by learning a whole new way
of enjoying pleasure
and pain and to many in the queer
community they were looked at as freaks
monsters horrors to be avoided at any
cost
what does it mean to be considered a
monster
by monsters even in harry and benshoff's
book monsters in the closet
which you'll no doubt notice shares a
title with this video's spiritual
predecessor
barker's work remains somewhat marginal
benchoff recognizes hellraiser for some
of its visual characteristics but comes
to the conclusion that
too often the representation of barker's
monster queers
seems similar to those produced by
right-wing ideologues
benshoff's book borrows many theories
put forward by robin wood in the late
1970s
in a series of essays would examine the
ways in which horror films reflect
repression
in contemporary society this study
attempts to shine a light on the shapes
that lurk in the shadows
and the way that the introduction of the
monster disrupts society
according to wood the basic formula of
the horror film
is that normality is threatened by the
monster
one of the controversial aspects of
wood's article is the distinction
that he makes between what he perceives
to be progressive and reactionary
reprehensible movements within the genre
this notion of reprehensible horror
continues to be a presence in monsters
in the closet and it would appear
that this attitude contributes greatly
to ben schaff's
general disdain for barker's work while
there is merit to the criticism that
there is a lack of positive queer
representation in hellraiser
the logic applied by both wood and
benshoff remains deeply
problematic their argument revolves
around the notion that
films like hellraiser want us to reject
the sights we see as being repugnant or
negative
when the reality is that barker finds
these images to be compelling
and horror film audiences are more
likely to be fascinated than disgusted
even if one accepts that the queer
images and hellraiser are not positive
ones
how does that make these representations
reprehensible
to a large extent the queers in
hellraiser belong to a pantheon of
hyperbolically monstrous gay characters
of the likes of which populate the films
of john waters
in his analysis of character
construction and gay narrative film
tom wah points out the irresistible
attraction by gay authors to images that
seem
harmful in the viewfinders of movement
ideologues
that accepting the fact that a bdsm
subculture exists within the queer
community further others us from the
heteronormative white picket fences of
the suburbs
and what is a queer person if they're
not accepted by the suburban rabble
a monster of course but there's an odd
attractiveness to the monsters of
hellraiser
when they move and speak there's a
certain degree of attractive nobility in
their appearance
these debauched angels may commit
visceral acts of savagery
but they also possess a surprising grace
and eloquence
while benshoff may view these creatures
as monster queers that are
not at all positive representations of
the community
it must needs be remarked that the
cenobites and hellraiser fit more
comfortably into the role of anti-hero
than that of the monster when our
protagonist kirstie
is confronted by the cenobites after
solving the puzzle box herself
and demands to know who they are she is
met with the reply
explorers in the further regions of
experience
demons to some angels to
others introduction implies that their
prey
chooses them not the other way around if
one assumes that their typical victim is
someone like frank
then it becomes apparent that their
talents are actively sought out by
hedonists
who are looking for new experiences when
they encounter an innocent
the cenobites unlike other slashers can
be reasoned with
their appearance may mark them as
outsiders but they pose no serious
threat to
normal people who wish to remain normal
just like any good master or dom they
don't want you
if you don't want them if the cenobites
are not truly the monster then what is
it would appear that the film's real
monster queer is frank
the undead beast the cenobites
unwittingly leave behind
he is the one that truly threatens
normality
when he returns to earth to resurrect
his long abandoned flesh
he intends to kill innocent people to
make it happen
frank the man is the monster
the man you'd walk by in a mall and not
give a second look
the man you'd say hello to in an
elevator he
is the real beast in hellraiser not the
cenobites
like how you're more likely to be raped
or killed by your husband
than anyone you'd meet in an s m club
the hell priest eventually christened
pinhead by fans
though barker loads the name is not a
mindless killer like jason voris or
michael myers
he's not a killer of innocence like
freddy krueger he is reasonable
and only comes when called keeps to
himself in his own realm much like the
queer community that lived in cities and
was not
infiltrating suburbs as so many white
americans feared in the late 1980s
though he and his fellow cenobites would
grow closer to their slasher brethren as
the hellraiser series went on
in the original he is not the monster to
be fear
the perfectly normal person was
but perfectly normal people
do have a habit of being monsters
[Music]
jennifer's body is the story more or
less of anita lesniki
needy for short once an insecure teenage
girl she is now a violent inmate in a
mental ward
narrating her story from solitary
confinement
since early childhood she had been
friends with the titular jennifer
though they had little in common with
needy being shy and reserved
and jennifer being a cheerleader
together the pair
attend a local rock concert at a bar
where needy's life
changes forever a fire with no known
source
engulfs the bar killing multiple people
needy pleads with jennifer to stay with
her but in her shock
she leaves with the band later that
night she turns up at needy's house
covered in blood
the next day at school she acts as if
everything is right with the world
the town is devastated by the fire and
the death it caused
but not jennifer her mind is set
elsewhere
the captain of the football team who she
seduces
and disembowels after multiple murders
it is revealed that on the night of the
fire the band had taken jennifer into
the woods and offered her up as a virgin
sacrifice to satan himself
in exchange for fame and fortune but
jennifer not being a virgin
was instead possessed discovering that
jennifer is now a succubus who will feed
off of human life to sustain herself
needy decides to take action after a
failed attempt that leaves her boyfriend
dead
she manages to kill jennifer and the
demon inside her
just in time for jennifer's mother to
discover her on top of her daughter's
corpse
so off to briarcliff she goes though
loathed upon release the film has more
recently been reevaluated as a modern
horror classic
it's fun messy mean sad campy and
self-aware
it's worth mentioning that the
advertising campaign for jennifer's body
was
deeply flawed portraying it as a sexy
thriller in order to play off of star
megan fox's hotness
it attempted to appeal to the male fans
of the transformers franchise
entirely the wrong audience it seemingly
borrows its premise from rape revenge
movies and can easily be read that way
at first glance
what's captivating about it though is
that you soon realize
that it is not what the film is actually
about
what happens to the abusers in the movie
is more an afterthought
played over the closing credits as needy
having escaped the asylum
kills the band who corrupted her friend
the actual beating heart of the story is
a messy codependent romance between
needy and jennifer
the initial scene that seems to be
played for laughs in the movie
is of needy ogling jennifer as she
cheerleads
showing a deep yearning for the
raven-haired beauty most of the
remainder of the film is spent
escalating the warped hungry tension
between the two girls
meanwhile chip needy's boyfriend
essentially falls into the role that
usually is held for the girlfriend in a
horror movie
he's either there to pose a problem for
the tumultuous relationship
or needs to be rescued for instance
early on in the movie chip stands
helplessly by while the girls giggling
amongst themselves
enter into a play pushing fight until
jennifer pushes needy just a little too
hard
instantly reading like a scene from an
elementary school playground or a boy
plays a bit too rough with a girl
because he likes her
the undercurrent of tension or even
hostility is soon mirrored by needy
herself
when she accompanies jennifer to the
aforementioned concert
she looks on uncomfortably as jennifer
plays up the role of the sweet awkward
doe-eyed girl in the hopes of getting
the lead singer's romantic attention
and retreats until she overhears the
band talking about jennifer being a
virgin
needy takes this as her cue to storm up
to the band taking on what looks to be a
protector role
insisting that jennifer is a virgin
which is something she knows to be
untrue
she also insists that jennifer is not
going to sleep with a band of slammy
scumbags amanda seyfried's delivery in
this scene evokes more than a protective
drive though
there's a current of jealous
defensiveness roiling just underneath it
she genuinely believes that jennifer is
too good to sleep with the band
she also resents that jennifer was even
considering it
she wants jennifer to be considering
sleeping with her instead
though it's never stated outright the
coding though is obvious enough for
most anyone to see later when jennifer
grabs and squeezes needy's hand during
the concert proper needy is appeased and
even relieved
she smiles warmly adoringly over at
jennifer
her smile only fades when she realizes
jennifer isn't looking back at her
and only has eyes for the band she
releases jennifer's hand abruptly
and we see the fading white patches
where jennifer had gripped her hand just
a little too hard
as mentioned before later that night a
bloodied maimed
non-verbal and snarling jennifer
staggers over to needy's house in the
middle of the night
desperate and hungry though jennifer is
unable or unwilling to communicate in
words what's happened to her
her physicality is speaking volumes this
is clearly a nod to both physical
manifestations of trauma
and a general reference to women in
horror movies and in real life
who can't talk about what's happening to
them or fear that they won't be believed
or understood this scene doesn't just
focus on the horror of the situation
though
the sexual tension between the two also
comes into focus as jennifer narrowly
resists biting needy on the neck
looking more like a kiss than a
potentially violent act
their relationship is stretched thin
over a tumultuous friendship between
teenage girls
but more than that it speaks to the
nature of attraction between young women
whose relationships can be incredibly
intimate
even between two straight girls so when
one or both of the girls are gay or bi
the thin line between platonic female
friendship and sexual female love can
become an emotional war zone
jennifer uses sex as bait to attract
male victims to devour
but shows no romantic interest in any of
them
their prey nothing else to her one scene
shows the uncomfortable simultaneous
acts of jennifer seducing a soon-to-be
victim
while needy makes love to her bumbling
boyfriend
looking at the scene through the eye of
a film editor it's easy enough to see
what's happening
jennifer is the aggressor in her scene
while needy
is the submissive partner in hers the
cutting back and forth can easily be
read as an editing trick to make the
mind see jennifer needy having sex
backing up that interpretation is the
fact that needy abandons her
heterosexual coupling in order to seek
out jennifer
after a series of scares she returns
home alone
unable to find her friend crawling into
bed she finds jennifer there waiting for
her
wearing one of needy's shirts a
girlfriend move if ever there was one
this scene of vulnerability culminates
with an actual kiss between the two
girls
needy pulls away demanding to know what
jennifer has been up to
she tells her her story ending it with
the line
anyway i don't really remember what
happened after that i just know that i
woke up
and i found my way back to you
after all that though needy begins to
doubt jennifer's story
feeling her control and her closeness to
needy slipping
jennifer reaches for the nearest easy
target
by trying to make needy insecure about
her relationship with chip
suggesting that chip is having second
thoughts about her
this is the first but not the last
effort of jennifer's to drive a wedge
between the couple
and doing so right on the heels of an
attempted romantic overture
is hard to read as anything
else than her wanting needy for herself
the lesbian coding is incredibly obvious
come on needy let me stay the night we
can play boyfriend girlfriend like we
used to
at the climax of the film needy
confronts jennifer armed with a box
cutter
leading to an acerbic little double
entendre on the slaying meaning of the
word box
and jennifer quipping that needy buying
her murder weapons at home depot is so
butch this is also the scene in which
jennifer finally bites needy while
they're fighting
the bite isn't lethal though and it's
clear that it wasn't meant to be
to me there's a very interesting reading
of jennifer's body
the queer teenage girls whose
sexualities are only starting to bloom
can easily become confused about their
relationships with other girls
straight girls and women have much
closer more intimate relationships than
straight boys and men
if you see two girls holding hands you
might not think anything of it
if you see a girl running her hand
through another girl's hair
she's probably just trying to help her
relax
kiss on the cheek or even lips
that's nothing if you hear two women say
i love you you don't immediately think
lesbians well there is a much stricter
code of conduct for men and boys
no hand holding no hugs that last for
too long
and a kiss or an i love you even between
fathers and sons
absolutely not and so there's a bit of
gay male privilege there if another boy
or man is acting very close and intimate
the assumption can be made that he's at
the very least not homophobic
and quite possibly open to something
more the situation is easier to read
because there are so many barriers put
up between men
a possible upside to toxic masculinity
but for young women how can you tell if
another girl is interested in you
in a romantic or sexual way because she
kissed you
held her hand cuddled you've likely been
doing that with female friends all your
life
as if being a woman wasn't hard enough
already
1979's alien directed by ridley scott is
often considered as one of the first
feminist science fiction movies with its
powerful central female
character and themes of reproduction and
sexual violence the film has become
lauded for being a cornerstone
in feminist film theory it's also
monstrously queer
not only is ellen ripley a strong butch
heroine
who does not at all fit the usual sci-fi
or
horror female archetype but according to
david mcentee author of beautiful
monsters the film
also plays very deliberately with male
fears of female reproduction
forcing the gestation of life onto male
characters and literally tearing them
apart during birth
but the queerness in alien reaches
beyond the obvious
when writing the screenplay dan o'bannon
wanted to focus more on developing the
xenomorph as a character
and so when writing the crew he left
them more or less generic
which included their gender a note on
the script reads
the crew is unisex and all parts are
interchangeable for men or women
from the conception of this story there
is a rejection of performative
gender from initial perceptions all of
our characters are similarly gendered
neutral
they wear the same loose jumpsuits and
are addressed by their surnames
removing any bases for gendered pronouns
the ship's male mechanics complain about
being paid less than everyone else
including the female crew at a time in
america when women were being paid 60
cents for every dollar a man made
once cast and the actors were given the
freedom to play their
parts as masculine or feminine star
sigourney weaver decided to play her
character as completely gender-neutral
in horror especially at the time of
release female characters were always
portrayed as victims or damsels in
distress
while an alien ripley is neither of
those things
she's strong and self-reliant
furthermore when ripley asserts
authority in the team after dallas is
caught by the alien
ash the male robot feels threatened and
attempts to dominate ripley
to regain his masculinity he's a
genderless robot
however he exemplifies constructed toxic
masculinity
aggression a fragile ego and
stubbornness
he attacks ripley who exemplifies gender
neutrality and sexual equality
literally attacking her with gender
conformity by shoving a porn magazine
down her throat
another male character kane is orally
raped by the facehugger
this leads to a forced impregnation
leading to death
in what is essentially childbirth
removing the assumed male privilege of
avoiding the pain of childbirth and
bringing it to a horrific conclusion
not only is kane raped and killed but
gives birth to a vicious
bloodthirsty phallus it's been no secret
that h.r geiger designed every form of
the xenomorph to represent sex organs
both male and female masculine and
feminine the overt and grotesque sexual
imagery in the alien is designed to
evoke fear and anxiety
which is how society was already
responding to sexual openness
and breaking out of what it means to be
typically male and female
the aliens phallic and vaginal
components are used together in stark
contrast from the traits and qualities
usually assigned to them thus
deconstructing notions of gender
the alien's body is overtly sexual and
blurs our ideas of anatomy
the horror and sexual violence from the
alien including the penetration of
lambert and forcing dallas into a
womb-like egg
as an allusion to motherhood suggests
that having one pair of genitals or
another doesn't make you inherently
violent
but that society's construction of
gender is to blame
we get a less coded queer representation
in 1986's sequel
when for a split second we see a
biography of the character lambert from
the first film
the biography establishes lambert as
having had her gender reassigned
from male to female lambert's bio reads
despite conversion at birth from male to
female so far there are no signs
of suppressed trauma from gender
reassignment
and so in a horror movie from 1979 we
technically have a transgender character
who is never othered never misgendered
and is not a villain
a retcon that changes nothing about the
story but adds trans representation when
little if any
was available james cameron's aliens is
curiously progressive
in its sexual politics overall
especially for a movie released during
the reagan years
take for instance the exchange between
hudson and frost
hey i sure wouldn't mind getting some
more of that
yeah the one that you had was male 1 it
doesn't matter when it's
so the butch space marine slept with a
man
and nobody makes a big deal out of it
except for frost
who wants to do it again
and he is wholeheartedly supported this
isn't just queer behavior being
portrayed in a positive manner
but one of the many ways that the movie
obfuscates gender and supports a
pansexual ethos the queer icon of aliens
though
is the female space marine vasquez who
is tougher than most of the men
in her squad in a movie released 27
years before the united states military
even let women take on combat roles
but is she herself queer the actors who
played her jeanette goldstein
weighed in on that question in 2016.
she's an outsider
she was just who she was with vasquez i
never said she was straight or gay
because to her it was nobody's business
a lot of gay women come up and say oh my
god when i saw you and you had a
masculine look to you
i saw myself but i had straight women
coming up to me with the same thing
someone was going through breast cancer
and she told me that with each round of
chemo
she would think of vasquez a gay man
from guatemala came to me and he said i
identify
so much with her he was very feminine
vasquez is universal elsewhere in the
film
is bishop another sexless cyborg like
the first film's ash
david grevin in demeter and persephone
in space observes
bishop the cyborg retooled as a queer
suffering body
is an example of a resistant masculinity
devoid of any obvious sexual desire
such figures suggest queer sexuality in
films and television
in that their refusal of the normative
codes of masculinity
suggest an alternative to them as with
ash but
much more pitiably the white blood that
drenches bishops suggests both mother's
milk and semen
but in a radical decontextualization
semen here
suggests the vulnerability of male
bodies
their susceptibility to violation rather
than unseemly urges
grevin further suggests that the aliens
and especially the alien queen
represent a cisgendered heteronormative
status quo
that resents the changing times what
gives this entire spectacle of shaming
its radical charge is the queer typing
of ripley as mother
with her short hair and male garb ripley
combines the masculine
and the feminine with her casual
indifference to heterosexual sex despite
some no sweat flirtation with hicks
she suggests the possibility of
different sexual needs
with her adoption of a child she
suggests the lesbian mother who thinks
outside the normative procreational box
the alien queen's vicious contempt
conveys the charge of an old
customary inability to recognize the
beauty and heroism
in queer love of the kind ripley and
newt embody
read as a queer allegory ripley newt the
reintegrated android bishop
and the wounded vulnerable and bedridden
hicks
together constitute the new queer family
the alien queen a repository of old
modes of contempt
and hate so while gribben suggests that
the conservative alien queen has
contempt for the queer family dynamic
the metaphor could go even further
cameron creates a future where gender
norms have all but disappeared
even subtle things like fashion such as
the female whalenutani executive at
ripley's hearing
wearing a power suit and sporting an
androgynous haircut
to the fact that the marines have a
co-ed locker room suggest
the battle of the sexes ended in a draw
it's the alien queen who although she
rules over an army of male drones is
actually trapped within the biological
determinism of her sex
forever cranking out eggs she ironically
wants to destroy this new world
and turn back the clock a few centuries
there's also the
aids allegory of the entire alien
franchise
though obviously not intended for the
first film which came out before aids
became well known
the sexual imagery of the xenomorph's
many forms and the imminent death
associated with them
make h.r geiger's beasts easy analogues
for the deadly bloodborne virus
especially in the sequel where just one
alien one drop of infected blood or
semen can create
such an infection that completely
overwhelms the host planet
or body this became especially prescient
with the release of alien 3.
the death of newton hicks before the
film even begins is central to this
message
aids seemingly kills at random the young
and innocent like newt
the healthy young men like hicks or
like ripley you might avoid the disease
by pure luck
then there's the population of fury 161
an almost completely abandoned prison
planet
one of the higher ups realizes that they
can potentially wrangle this little
alien problem into a profitable venture
much like how big pharma companies
worked on releasing
oppressively expensive treatments
instead of working toward a cure and
this speech from dylan
the only question is how you check out
do you want it on your feet or on your
[ __ ] knees
i ain't much for begging hitting like
larry kramer's 1987
speech when he launched act up the alien
created by
h.r geiger brought to life by ridley
scott and perfected by james cameron
is a monster that exploited our fears of
gender sex
infection and lost control
a monster so ravenous there is no escape
but not all monsters are so obvious
[Music]
it follows tells the story of jay a 19
year old suburban girl
who acquires a sexually transmitted
curse from her boyfriend hugh
after they first have sex hugh sedates
her forcing her to heed his instructions
about the curse
she must sleep with someone as soon as
she can in order to pass it along to
another person
and on and on or else she'll be tracked
down
and killed by another worldly entity the
titular it
if it kills her it will resume tracking
hue
since it follows only one person at a
time
the monster in it follows may be a
supernatural being
but the film's true source of horror is
living under a regime of sexual shame
where our heteronormative culture
compels sexual subjects toward monogamy
even at the risk of their overall
well-being though many critics pointed
out that it follows cleverly subverts
the usual you have sex you die trope
from 1980 slasher movies
few grasped the idea that the monster in
the film would more or less become
harmless in a society
where sexual promiscuity was the norm
having sex with new partners on a
regular basis
constantly shifting its targets to the
point at which it could follow
but never catch up in time to kill
at a glance it follows would seem
unlikely to have a queer reading since
it doesn't feature any queer characters
or monsters that could be easily coded
as such
nor does it feature any of the
homoerotic undertones of movies like a
nightmare on elm street ii the lost boys
or rope
instead its queerness is less monolithic
for some viewers a horror movie that
depicts sexual partners spreading a
deadly curse via sex might seem deeply
sex negative
indeed many reviewers saw the film's
central conceit as tapping into the
fears
of anyone who came of age during the
aids crisis
the threat of aids has of course long
been allegorically linked to popular
horror imagery
like the aforementioned alien john
carpenter's the thing
david cronenberg's the fly or any number
of post-80s vampire tales
but the film's queer lesson is less
about the avoidance of sex
than the management of risk after all
according to the film's logic those
infected by the curse can survive only
by successfully
finding new sexual partners
versus remaining abstinent and living
out the fatal consequences of their
prior sexual history
the film barely acknowledges that jay
has any other option but to find new
partners
and it's her hesitance to move beyond a
series of monogamous bonds that
could ultimately prove to be her
downfall therefore the film implies that
having a sex life is
inevitable and always involves a certain
level of risk emotional or physical
but the film also suggests that the
danger truly lies in the social
attitudes that make sex and promiscuity
shameful
we're also told very clearly that jay
was not a virgin at the beginning
of the film when she acquired the curse
and therefore the allegorical infection
shouldn't be looked at as some kind of
punishment for premarital
or non-procreative sex as it would be in
so many other movies in the genre
importantly neither hugh nor the film in
general
ever specify which sexual acts will
successfully pass along the curse
thus opening plenty of space for queer
speculation
is heterosexual sex the only option will
same-sex partners do the trick
do oral or anal sex count what about
non-genital forms of sexuality s
m kink or masturbation maybe just
how conventional and vanilla are the
expectations of this paranormal being
the idea of destigmatizing promiscuous
sex was particularly timely when it
follows hit theaters
media attention had just begun
addressing the slow growing popularity
of drugs like truvada
as a way to stop new hiv infections not
only does the drug reduce the likelihood
of a positive person passing on the
disease
in some cases making it impossible but
can also prevent the disease from taking
hold if taken by hiv negative people
thus reopening a part of queer sexual
life
that had been more or less shut off
since the 1980s but anyone who mentioned
that they were using the drug commonly
known as prep
immediately found themselves being
slut-shamed
many doctors could be judgmental of
patients asking for
the once a day pill thrusting their
moral opinions on a medical issue
and so for some time many people in the
gay community refuse to ask their
doctors for a prescription
shaming people for wanting to add an
extra layer of safety to their sex life
prep is much more common now resulting
in transmission rates of the hiv virus
dropping dramatically
but for a time right around the release
of it follows
the shame of being seen as promiscuous
by doctors or friends
stopped a lot of people from getting the
new little blue pill
until then anything but monogamy even
with a condom
was looked at as a risky dangerous and
irresponsible behavior in much of the
queer community
it follows appeared at a historical
moment when a hetero turned homo
normative model of monogamy
was upheld as law of the land while a
countervailing trend saw the partial
overcoming of long-time anxieties about
the most infamously fatal of sex-born
diseases
opening fresh possibilities for sexual
autonomy the film may not have been
deliberately intended as a
socio-political commentary on such
shifts
indeed david robert mitchell the film's
writer director left the monster's
motives and weaknesses
nightmarishly unexplained and open to
interpretation
but the place of queerness as a sort of
structuring absence within the film
an unnamed but perpetually haunting
presence
still speaks to a queer audience but
just like how prep
has not completely disposed of hiv the
monster in it follows is similarly
relentless
following a traumatic confrontation that
ends with jay agreeing
to pass the curse along to a boy who's
had a crush on her since childhood
the apparently monogamous couple walk
hand in hand down a quiet suburban
street
unaware that behind them
it follows
[Music]
not all horror movies deal with the
supernatural
some are more than happy to terrify you
with what you know best
your friends your family your home
turning something mundane
into something truly terrifying bringing
horror to a place that it never should
have been
that's something that horror expert wes
craven did all too well
by making the violent killer of a film
someone you would have usually
sympathized with in the last house on
the left
perverting the relative safety of dreams
with a nightmare on elm street
blurring the lines between horror and
real life with his new nightmare
and then bringing horror to the safest
of all places in clinton america
the suburbs with scream written by
outgay screenwriter kevin williamson
scream tells the tale of sydney prescott
who a year after her mother's murder is
having those old wombs figuratively and
literally reopened
but the queerness of the film has
nothing to do with sydney or her mother
but with the killers billy and stu
as well as the uncomfortable social
changes toward a more lgbt accepting
society in the late 1990s
in terms as resonant as they were phobic
scream was a cry of despair
over an apparent immorality in the
millennial or late gen x youth
especially in the male population the
homoeroticism of the billy stew
relationship
which the film develops into an all but
explicit queer love affair
shows both the unpredictable anarchic
bewildering behavior of the generation
and the shifts in male gender roles
synonymous with it
scream redeploys the long-standing
american tradition of a homoerotic bond
between a pair of young male killers
the foundation of the tradition is the
infamous leopoldon loeb case
these wealthy young men were university
of chicago students who murdered the
fourteen-year-old bobby franks in 1924
both were sentenced to life in prison
with one of them being murdered by
another inmate shortly after sentencing
this case generated several fictional
treatments including hitchcock's 1948
film rope
which i covered in monsters in the
closet these killers considered
themselves to be nietzschean supermen
using their superior intellect as
justification for their thrill killing
billy and stu however have no such lofty
philosophical ambitions
their motivations are family and romance
driven
billy claims to be avenging himself for
sydney's mother's crime of destroying
his family
and stu seemingly is just doing it for
billy
scream also offers contrasting portraits
of masculinity but only in order to
intensify
its vision of an increasing cultural
depravity
perhaps the first touch that links the
killers to queerdom is ghostface's first
appearance to
sydney he tries to trick her into
believing that he's
on her front porch the killer then jumps
out of her closet instead
there's also the image of sydney's open
closet door protecting her from harm
i might be reaching here but it's not
hard to read that as
it's better to have your closet door
open than closed
skeet ulrich's performance as billy and
especially matthew lillards as stu
deepened the queer resonance that stand
forever on a knife's edge of obviousness
ulrich's bloody intensity and perpetual
white t-shirt clearly evoke
james dean and rebel without a cause the
intense look in his eyes either sad or
cunning
keeps the audience as off-balance to his
identity
as it does sydney but when he does
reveal his murderous identity the facade
dissolves entirely and he passes through
intensity into truly frightening
the dark underbelly of his pristine
all-american geniality
lillard stew meanwhile is notable for
his gender bending potential
he uses his basketball player height
rubbery face and excessive emotionalism
to create a memorably frantic character
that would shock no one if he suddenly
appeared in full drag
in one scene set in the video store
where randy of movie geek works
randy theorizes about billy's possible
identity as the killer
in perhaps the most homoerotic moment in
the film
billy suddenly swings upon randy
challenging him
how do we know you're not the killer huh
huh hi billy maybe your movie freaked
mine lost it's reality button you ever
think of that
as billy gets in randy's face stu comes
up from behind him
in a shockingly intimate almost
threesome
what has been called femmephobia
intersects here with homophobia
as the killer's increasingly inept
performance of gender mirrors their
ultimately inept attempt
to craft the perfect murder plot craven
makes the interesting choice to stage
the big revelation scene
at the climax of the film in the kitchen
the mama's boy killers reveal the
nefarious identities within the domestic
space most closely associated with the
mother
earlier in the film billy and sydney
have sex after she announces that
if life is one big movie genre her pick
is porn ghostface suddenly appears
right after they've finished and
seemingly stabs billy to death
one can assume that he's been watching
them do the deed the entire time
of course we soon learn that this is
only a ruse to distract sydney from
billy's real identity as one of the
killers
billy staggers back to life in his
seemingly blood-drenched t-shirt
getting possession of the gun sydney had
been wielding billy shoots randy and
then
dabs a finger in his blood and brings it
up to his lips
there's also the negative oedipus
complex homosexuality is the chief
aspect of it
in a footnote added in 1910 to his 1905
three essays on the theory of
sexuality sigmund freud conjecture's
homosexual identity emerges from an
identification with the mother
and billy is nothing if not obsessed
with his mother
while many have read freud's theory as
homophobic it would likely be fairer to
say that it's been put to homophobic use
in american psychiatry
which historically used it to
pathologize homosexuality as an arrested
development
what scream makes vividly clear is the
cultural reception of narcissistic
mother identified desire the killers and
scream are monstrous not only because
they kill
but because their desire proceeds from
identification with the mother what
complicates or is
left deliberately unresolved by the
filmmakers is the specific nature of the
boy's relationship with each other
stu's desire is left especially unclear
but in some ways it is his desire that
more clearly has a basis
in the homoerotic stu has a girlfriend
dispatched via garage door but his chief
affection is directed toward billy
to whom he's quite clearly devoted what
is most significant about stu's
relationship with billy are the ways in
which billy's desire becomes
stu's desires becoming an easy analog
for the feeling of many gay teenage boys
who will do anything
play any sport see any movie take any
drug
in a desperate attempt to connect with
their male crushes
a queer reading becomes more obvious at
least to me when the pair of killers
decide they need to stab each other in
order to frame sydney for the killings
penetrating one another to show their
devotion replicating the pain
of virginal anal sex scream
with its queer coding delicious dialogue
and willingness to reach
into camp territory when necessary has
become a classic slasher among the queer
community
while we watch it as a smart send up of
the genre which was well and dead in
many people of the more hetero
persuasion see the film a bit
differently
it's the horror of danger coming to the
suburbs
a place of safety being perverted where
nice white families fled to
in order to escape the poor black and
queer horrors that filled the city
streets
and in scream the queer horror
penetrated that safety it also tore
apart the idea of the ideal american
family
billy's family was torn asunder when
sydney's mother had an affair with his
father
leading to a divorce and his mother
leaving town
and so he took sydney's mother away from
her too the fragility of the straight
nuclear family coming to a bloody end
just as the new millennium dawned
showing us all that families though a
nice idea
can lead to unexpected horrors
in 2017 a perhaps unlikely queer icon
emerged in the form of a black and white
cartoon character from australia
with sharp teeth theatrical makeup and a
top hat
this cultural phenomenon began with the
2016 tumblr thread initiated by online
user
e instagram who declared mr babadook the
titular monster from jennifer kent's
2014 horror film to be fearlessly and
proudly gay
in his initial post instagram wonders
whenever someone says that the babadook
isn't openly gay it's like
did you even watch the movie sparking
what participants called a baba
discourse
scores of others weighed in on the
tumblr thread with one user proclaiming
the b
in lgbt stands for babadook the next
several months saw the proliferation
of queer babadook memes and multiple
representations of the babudooka 2017
pride festivals
across the united states the babadook
has emerged as a queer icon
because he can be read as having
characteristics associated with cultural
gayness
for example he wears dramatic costuming
that recalls the theatricality of drag
and he struggles against a rather
literally closeted existence
in which many disavow or reject him
while references to these
characteristics abound in the typically
humorous and ironic examples of the
character's queerness
this monster and the film from which he
emerges call for critical attention to
normative constructions of the family
the hegemony of reproductive
heterosexuality
and the implications of both for the
lives of women
that is the babadook invites queer
appropriation because
he represents the horrors of
heteronormative family life
and gender politics while socially
conservative rhetoric frequently casts
the family as a site of innocence
imperiled by outside
forces the babadook constructs the
family as a site that is too often
constituted
by multiple forms of systemic physical
and emotional violence
narratively the babadook written and
directed by jennifer kent is the story
of emilia
a single mother and her only son samuel
on the day her son would be born amelia
and her husband oscar have a car
accident
on the way to the hospital and oscar
dies having given up her career as a
writer to earn a living as a nursing
home attendant
emilia has been samuel's only caregiver
an isolating experience exasperated by
both
other people's uneasiness with her grief
and by their ableist discomfort with
samuel's differences
emilia's ability to care for her son
becomes severely constrained when she
decides
she must remove him from his school
which seems unwilling or unable to
accommodate his needs
at the same time samuel becomes fixated
on an invisible monster that he warns
lives in their house
when a mysterious and violent children's
book appears amelia begins to fear that
the monster is not a figment of samuel's
imagination
and soon she and her home are tormented
by a boogeyman
known as the babadook who lives under
her child's bed
and in his closet as anxiety
sleeplessness and trauma take a toll on
amelia
she first directs her anger at samuel
becoming violent
before eventually confronting the
babadook
she realizes she can never fully rid
their lives of the monster that now
resides in their home
she determines to make relative peace
with it
locking it in their basement but keeping
it well fed and alive
as illustrated by a line in the
babadook's book the more you deny the
stronger i
get the monster operates as a signifier
of emilia's grief over oscar's death
the more she represses this trauma the
more power it has to return and disrupt
her life
this allegory is not however the only
one at work within the babadook
amelia appears as a 21st century sister
of rosemary from rosemary's baby
as the babadook crosses the horror
formula of
other as villain with the female gothic
interest in gendered experience and
victimhood
transforming the beleaguered female
protagonist herself into a monster
backing up the idea that the greatest
monsters do not come from without or
from within
that perhaps the monsters in
heteronormative suburbia
did not come from the outside from
cities
but that they've been there all along
and how does one become a suburban
monster
by trying to fit in emilia is struggling
financially
and the depiction of the life she leads
with her son shows the economic
vulnerability of single-parent families
especially single mothers
her stress to keep everything running
smoothly to try for normal
is what drives her to become the
maternal monster that strikes out at her
own son
the babadook on the other hand
ostensibly coded queer does no actual
harm to amelia or samuel
it is just the fear of him that causes
harm it is the societal pressure of the
heteronormative world that causes harm
amelia's paranoia the sense of being
watched originates in the way her public
life is dominated by and
private life intruded upon by
institutional and bureaucratic forces
that scrutinize her
and especially her parenting first the
representatives of the school system
that had failed samuel
and then the community service
representatives that take over
then there are the disturbing encounters
with others that she hopes will help her
the doctor who judges her when she
requests sleeping pills to make samuel
sleep
so that she herself can sleep and the
desk sergeant in the police station who
when
amelia attempts to report a stalker
looks back at her with the strange pale
eyes of the storybook monster both
encounters show historically strained
relations between institutional
authorities and women under threat
society is actively and passively
harming her
while the queer monster remains mostly
benign
in acknowledgment of these real everyday
social pressures on emilia the forum
taken by the babadook references the
familiar source of her madness
and monstrosity there are elements of
samuel as the babadook's garb recalls
the little boy's homemade magician's
costume
while the threat of its mouth in the
pop-up book offers a horror movie
version of samuel's screams for
attention
and then there's the house a victorian
style house that kent had constructed
specifically for this film
and that operates as a character in its
own right specifically of note
are the ways that the home in the film
diverges from both idealized
constructions of the home
and the role of the home within the
horror movie genre the signifier of the
home often functions as an allegory for
heteronormative sexist ablest and
classist figurations of family
how homeownership is often considered a
milestone for success and stability for
those a part of or
wishing to be a part of the
heteronormative masses how often the
home acts as a site for the production
and regulation of bodies that are
normatively gendered and sexed
and how consistently the culture of
suburban home life and
typical design practices presume that a
house's inhabitants will all be fully
abled
thereby rendering them inaccessible to
those who are not
physically ideal the single-family home
acting as a sort of
moated castle protecting the inhabitants
from the working poor they might
otherwise come across in an apartment
building
or the infirm in a nursing home or the
other races
or queers and select ghettoized areas
but in the babadook those others
infiltrate the home and cause no harm
threaten
yes but never act only the self causes
harm
not the other the babadook's queerness
lies in its subversion of the family
in its apparent danger to what is
accepted by society
by only growing in power the more it is
denied
like a gaping wound that begins to
fester each time a person lies about
their sexuality
every time someone pretends to be
someone they're not so that society will
accept them
and there's an odd draw to the black and
white monster for queer people
outside the movie it was looked at as a
joke like so many queer
icons initially are cher judy garland
dolly parton
all looked at as over the top and worth
nothing more than derision
and then they enter into a cultural
permanence once they're adopted by the
queer community
someone was like how could the babadook
become a gay film
and the answer was readily available
said karen thompson
an associate professor of gender studies
in english at usc
he lives in a basement he's weird and
flamboyant
he's living adjacently to a single
mother in this kind of
queer kinship structure he exists in a
half-acknowledged state by the other
people in his house
the family is afraid of what he is but
finds a way to accept him over time
for many lgbt people that's what it
feels like to be
in your own family sometimes naturally
there are counter arguments
the babadook never says he's gay he
never displays physical attraction to
another person
but historically fictional characters
haven't needed to say
i am gay out loud to be read as queer
or to become queer icons so many lgbt
people have been barred from seeing
themselves represented in popular
culture
so we've had to project ourselves into
so many of these figures thongson said
there are ways to read into the
character itself
and the structure of how this ostensibly
monstrous thing
becomes incorporated ultimately into a
family
but is the babadook gay
when asked about this in 2019 director
jennifer kent simply replied
of course sometimes it's just that
simple
sometimes the monster the queer can be
accepted
sometimes suburbia isn't so bad
but sometimes it
can be a nightmare
[Music]
it by stephen king was published in 1986
and has made a lasting cultural
impression
the novel inspired a mini-series two
movies and ruined clowns for generations
of children
and adults frankly pennywise transforms
into things that will scare people the
most
and stephen king used the 1950s setting
to pay tribute to classic movie monsters
since its release the novel has inspired
fans to discuss its themes allegories
and underlying subtext
a common discussion is the
interpretation that richie tozier and
eddie kasprak had strong repressed gay
feelings for one another
the most recent adaptation it chapter 2
directed by andy musgetty
dedicates an entire subplot to the
romance between richie and eddie
there have been protests that the
character's change in sexuality comes
out of nowhere but
that's not so quite cut and dry when
eddie first encounters pennywise the
titular it
he's at a place known to attract hobos
and drifters
it takes the form of a hobo who's
stricken with disease
it uses a leper to frighten eddie
instead of your typical horror movie
monster
one of these fellows had crawled out
from under the porch of the house at 29
nybolt street one day and had offered to
give eddie a [ __ ] for a quarter
eddie had backed away his skin like ice
his mouth as dry as lint balls
one of the hobo's nostrils had been
eaten away you could look right into the
red scabby channel
i i don't have a quarter eddie said
backing toward his bike
do it for a dime the hobo croaked coming
toward him
he was wearing old green flannel pants
yellow
puke was stiffening across the lap
he unzipped his fly and reached inside
he was trying to grin his nose was a red
horror
uh i don't have a dime either eddie said
and suddenly thought oh my god he's got
leprosy
if he touches me i'll catch it too his
control snapped and he ran
he heard the hobo break into a shuffling
run behind him
his old string tied shoes slapping and
flapping across the riotous lawn of the
empty saltbox house
eddie's physical manifestation of fear
has symbolic meaning that is linked to
his abusive upbringing
eddie sees it as a leper because his
mother's insistence that he is sickly
and delicate
has made him afraid of disease
eddie is horrified of the leper's
appearance but the real terror
doesn't set in until he realizes that he
could catch its illness
the leper uses the offer of sexual
favors to scare him
nowhere else in the story does pennywise
threaten the children with sexual
assault
so its decision to do so here
is an important distinction this
metaphor is significant
because the leper is a sickly diseased
man offering oral sex to eddie and
its combination of these things shows us
a deep
fear eddie has unknown even to himself
eddie's afraid of doing sexual things
with men because he believes he will get
a disease and die
its use of the leper as a manifestation
of eddie's fear
is our first clue that eddie is
queer-coded
because he is groomed to fear disease
and sickness
he fears his own homosexuality and views
it as something that could kill him
though this section of the book takes
place in the 1950s the book itself was
published in the chaotic midst of the
aids crisis
when gay sex really could lead to a
disease and death
we also get some interesting religious
imagery as eddie thinks back to the root
of his religious fear
he's quick to dismiss religious rules as
stupid but stops himself
as he remembers he takes religion
seriously enough
to be afraid of it it's interesting that
eddie fears going to hell even though
he's never done anything to warrant it
reading eddie's inner turmoil as the
result of suppressed homosexual feelings
it makes sense for eddie to wonder about
going to hell because of who he is
rather than something he's done another
coded aspect of eddie's hidden sexuality
is how he interacts with the other
losers
in one scene stephen king singles out
eddie as being
delighted by bill we get an explanation
for eddie's unmatched joy
when eddie tries to imitate bill
modelling himself after the boy in order
to come across as brave
eddie idolizes bill and his love is
rooted in that admiration
there are many references to eddie
having hero worship for bill or seeming
to love bill more than the other losers
this is disguised as eddie simply
idolizing bill
but it reads much clearer as an
unrequited crush on him
with eddie simply not knowing how to
categorize it
another member of the losers club that
hits home with queer readers is richie
a character many people even straight
readers have interpreted
as being bisexual he like most of the
boys in the group
has at least a bit of a crush on beverly
the lone girl
but also a clear connection with eddie
as well
not just in friendship or love but in
trauma
childhood trauma looms under the skin of
the losers club well
into adulthood as it chapter 2 explores
the reunion of the crew
in their hometown for most of the
children their trauma existed on the
surface
of the first it film eddie's overbearing
mother
beverly's father verbally abusing her
and sexually taunting her as she begins
to grow into her adult body
mike seeing his parents burned alive six
out of the seven losers left dairy as
soon as they were old enough
leaving allowed them to forget the
trauma but leaving didn't remove it
just tucked it away out of sight
where it could seep out and impact their
life
later on both beverly and eddie married
a version of their abusive parents
bill now a writer can't think of a happy
ending
ever since his little brother georgie
was murdered by pennywise
stanley is so terrorized by his
childhood torment that he kills himself
when he finds out that it has returned
like every person on the planet the
losers remain trapped in their trauma
they've just found new ways to cope
richie ended up telling jokes
and becoming rich and successful but
always alone throughout it chapter 2 it
becomes clear
that richie is a closeted gay man in
love with eddie
mostly this revelation becomes clear
through two scenes
the first is a flashback of richie
hanging out at an arcade the same summer
of the losers
defeated pennywise see the movies take
place bit further ahead of time than the
book
he plays street fighter with a boy he's
had a crush on
when the kid says he has to go richie
offers to pay for the next round
unfortunately his crush's cousin henry
bowers
lives to torment richie and his friends
now face to face with a stab happy bully
and surrounded by the judging eyes of
his peers
richie's sexuality and therefore
masculinity is challenged by his crush
richie runs out of the arcade and seeks
refuge in a public park
before him stands the symbol of
masculinity a giant ax swinging paul
bunyan looming
20 feet high in his flannel and denim
he's a stark contrast to richie's blue
and pink swirled button-up shirt
the american folk hero instantly becomes
a threat with shredded teeth
the second scene that reveals ritchie is
queer doesn't happen until eddie dies
everyone is sad but richie is beside
himself
so overcome with emotion that he has to
be hauled out of the sewer by his
friends
adult ritchie doesn't seem to fit into a
2019 narrative
not everyone can come out in america but
richie works as a comedian in los
angeles even if he chose to keep his
sexuality close to the vest
the idea that gay marriage and giant
pride parades could miss a white man
working in hollywood doesn't make sense
if it did highlighting that fact would
be vital to understanding the character
the murky nature of richie's queer
identity feels
like a letdown the second chapter of it
attempts to reveal the way
dormant childhood trauma springs forth
in adulthood
anything buried will eventually rise to
the surface
except for richie's sexuality apparently
the queer community is still struggling
to be seen in cinema as more than tragic
romances or gay best friends
the balance of the identity
representation within the losers club
offered an awesome opportunity to detail
the effects of the past 30 years on the
most privileged members of the community
but in the film richie a well-off
white masculine gay man
never even says that he's gay out loud
not everything in it
is coding though very early on in the
story we are shown the brutal gay
bashing and violent murder
of adrian mellon a murder so heinous
it wakes the titular it from its
decades-long slumber
king's language is harsh with characters
using a vast array of homophobic slurs
in those early pages
but those characters using them even the
police are not celebrated
the author is very clearly judging them
and it's this
horrible violence so soon into the book
that shows the darkness and hate
lurking under the surface of small town
america
it is the hate that's unnatural the hate
that is evil not being queer
when we get into the head of don hagerty
adrian's boyfriend
and the author lets the reader know him
he's sympathetic he's smart and loving
he also sees the town for what it is
sees its evil clearly and wants to leave
it
though the characters in the book don't
empathize with him for having his
boyfriend killed in front of him
the author does he shows the gay
character as human
in the midst of reagan america the
world's best-selling author
was sending a very blunt message
stephen king thought gay people should
be able to date
and hold hands and live their lives
stephen king did not think gay people
should be tortured or killed
he thought that those who would torture
or kill gay people were in the service
of evil
as were those who would tolerate it or
look away
the victims of homophobia did not
deserve to be victims
homophobia stephen king seemed to say is
not the natural way of the world
it is a monstrous thing and those who
practice it
are a part of the monster like the
babadook
hellraiser jennifer's body the craft and
king's own carry
the queer is not the monster
something else is gay men
lesbian women bisexual people
transgender people everyone under the
queer umbrella
we are not the monsters you
are not the monster
but the society that demonizes you that
others you
that is the monster
[Music]
you